# Dispersion
This repository accompanies the publication

> I. Márton, L. Sarkadi, ["Study of the effect of higher-order dispersions on photoionisation induced by ultrafast laser pulses applying a classical theoretical method"](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-18034-w), Scientific Reports, **12**, 13841 (2022).

In this article, we investigated the effect of higher-order dispersion on ultrafast photoionisation. To produce the results, we used C++, Octave, and Gnuplot.

# Basic usage of Waveform.m
The *Waveform.m* Octave script calculates the temporal profile of the electric field shaped with higher-order dispersion. The properties of the incoming ultrafast laser pulse must be defined:<br>
1. The laser intensity is determined by the 'Intensity' variable in units of $\frac{W}{cm^2}$.
2. The intensity full width at half maximum (FWHM) is defined by the 'PulseWidth' variable in units of femtoseconds (fs).<br>
3. The central wavelength is defined by the 'Wavelength' variable in units of nanometers.
4. The carrier-envelope phase (CEP) is defined by the vector 'CEP_value' in units of degrees. Example: if the vector is defined as 'CEP_value = 0 : 3 : 357;', it means the script calculates CEP values from 0, 3, 6, ...., 357 .
5. The value(s) of the higher-order dispersion(s) are given by the vector 'value'. Similarly to the CEP values, the code calculates with all the dispersion values given by the vector 'value'. The type of higher-order dispersion is defined by the 'GDD = value(i_Dispersion);' command. This code can deal with three different types of higher-order dispersions, namely the second-order dispersion or group-delay dispersion (GDD), third-order dispersion (TOD), and fourth-order dispersion (FOD). If we replace the 'GDD' in the command line with 'TOD' or 'FOD', the script will calculate ultrafast laser pulses shaped with TOD or FOD respectively with higher-order dispersion values given by the 'value' vector. The code calculates first the Gaussian transform-limited pulse, with the given intensity, FWHM, central wavelength, and CEP values, then it calculates the pulses shaped with higher-order dispersion(s) according to the chapter 'The theory of dispersion' in the above-mentioned article. The code writes out only the temporal profile(s) of the ultrashort pulses that were shaped with higher-order dispersion.<br>
## Output files generated by Waveform.m
The script generates four types of output files. The names of the files contain the properties of the ultrashort laser pulse.<br>
1. The names of the text files consisting of the temporal profile of the electric field have the following form: 'waveForm_1e+15Wcm_7fs_0CEP_0GDD_90TOD_0FOD.txt'. It means this file contains the temporal profile of the pulse that was shaped with $0 fs^2$ GDD, $0 fs^4$ FOD, and $90 fs^3$ TOD. The incoming, or transform-limited pulse has an intensity of $10^{15}\frac{W}{cm^2}$ intensity, 7 fs FWHM, and 0 degrees of CEP. These text files consist of three columns. The first column stands for the time, the second stands for the real part of the electric field, and the third column means the absolute value of the electric field. The measurement unit is given by (Hartree) atomic units. The number of 'waveForm_...' text files is equal to the number of CEP values in the 'CEP_value' vector multiplied by the number of higher-order dispersion values given in the 'value' vector.<br>
2. The names of .jpg files showing the temporal profile of the electric field has the following form: 'Graph_1e+15Wcm_7fs_0CEP0GDD_90TOD_0FOD.jpg'. Apart from the CEP, the file name contains the properties of the pulse it depicts, similar to the previous one. The depicted electric fields have 0-degree CEP values and therefore the number of files is equal to the number of dispersion values in the 'value' vector. The figure shows both the original transform-limited pulse, and the pulse shaped with higher-order dispersion.<br>
3. The names of the text files consisting of the Wigner function of the ultrashort laser pulse have the following form:'Wigner_1e+15Wcm_7fs_0GDD_90TOD_0FOD.txt'. The file name contains the properties of the pulse, and the number of text files containing the Wigner distributions is equal to the number of dispersion values in the 'value' vector. These text files consist of three columns. The first column stands for the time, the second stands for the angular frequency, and the third column stands for the values of the Wigner function. The measurement unit is given by (Hartree) atomic units. The 't_lower', 't_upper', 'f_lower', 'f_upper' variables are to define the minimal and maximal moment of time and angular frequency respectively, where the Wigner function is plotted and written out. <br>
4. The names of .jpg files showing the Wigner function of the ultrashort laser pulse have the following form: 'Wigner_1e+15Wcm_7fs_0GDD_0TOD_500FOD.jpg'. The file name contains the properties of the pulse it depicts, and the number of .jpg files containing the Wigner distributions is equal to the number of dispersion values in the 'value' vector.

# The CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp file
The 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp' is a code to simulate the ionization processes of atoms induced with ultrashort laser pulses with the classical-trajectory Monte Carlo method. The code uses GNU Scientific Library, and OpenMP, and therefore is capable of exploiting the advantage of shared memory parallelism. 
## Basic usage
The variable 'z_target' in the main function stands for the atomic number of the atom or ion. The 'z_electron' is the charge of the electron. The variable 'N_electron' in the main function stands for the number of electrons in the atom or ion. The 'm_electron' and 'm_target' stands for the mass of the electron and target respectively. The variable 'Num' in the main function stands for the number of trajectories the program is calculating for a given ultrafast pulse. The code requires 'waveForm_...' file(s) that are the output of the 'Waveform.m' script. The CTMC program reads in the waveform(s) of the ultrafast laser pulse given by the waveform files and executes the simulation. Every time the program is finished with a simulation, it renames the file 'waveForm_...' to 'awaveForm_...'. As the program reads in every file starting with 'waveForm_', one should not place files in the working folder with that name, unless it stands for an ultrashort pulse and has the format discussed previously. The 'dBinding_energy_of_elements' variable stands for the binding energies of atoms and ions required in CTMC calculations. As it contains the binding energies of 36 elements, it can simulate ionisation processes for atoms having atomic numbers not bigger than 36.
The code can be compiled with the

     g++ CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp -fopenmp -o CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD -lgsl -lgslcblas -lm

command and can be invoked with the

     ./CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD Number_of_threads

command where 'Number_of_threads' is the number of threads the program can use during the execution. The format of the code output is 'Statistics_Na_1e+15Wcm_7fs_0CEP_0GDD_0TOD_500FOD_1e-06epsilon.txt', where 'Na' refers to the element or ion (with the electrical charge of the ion), the '1e+15' refers to the intensity in $\frac{W}{cm^2}$, the CEP value is given by degrees, and the three kinds of higher-order dispersions are also indicated. The '1e-06epsilon' refers to the parameter that determines the step size in the applied Dormand-Prince method. The first eight lines of the file contain general information about the calculations.
1. In the first line, we can see the atomic number, the number of electrons, and the charge of the electron.
2. The second line shows the masses of the target (atom or ion) and electron respectively.
3. The third line shows values relevant to the calculations and can be obtained from the masses and charges of the electron and target.
4. The fourth line shows the binding energy in atomic units and electronvolts as well. The rest of the values in the fourth line describe the screened (Garvey) potential. Details of the Garvey potential can be found in R. H. Garvey, C. H. Jackman and A. E. S. Green, ["Independent-particle-model potentials for atoms and ions with 36<Z≤54 and a modified Thomas-Fermi atomic energy formula"](https://journals.aps.org/pra/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevA.12.1144), Physical Review A, **12**, 1144 (1975).
5. The fifth and sixth lines show the number of excitation and ionisation events respectively.
6. The seventh and eighth lines show the number of anomalous events. Further details are not given about the anomalous events.
7. The rest of the file shows the relevant information about the ionised electrons in 13 columns. The quantities of the 13 columns are shown in line nine. These are the position (ex, ey, ez), the velocity (vx, vy, vz), the momentum (px, py, pz), the energy (Etotal), the kinetic and potential energies (Ekin, Epot) of the ionised electron(s) respectively. The (time_of_ionization) stands for the first moment when the energy of the electron was positive, namely when the electron ionised. These quantities are in (Hartree) atomic units.

### The CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP.cpp file
The 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP.cpp' is a code to simulate ionisation processes of atoms with the CTMC method and with an ultrafast pulse having linear chirp. The angular frequency is determined by the

$$
\begin{equation}
\omega(t) = \omega_0 + \beta \times t,
\label{chirp_eq}
\end{equation}
$$

where $\omega(t)$ is the time-dependent angular frequency, $\beta$ is the chirp parameter, $\omega_0$ is the angular frequency corresponding to the central wavelength. The calculations are performed with random CEP values.

The code can be compiled with the

     g++ CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP.cpp -fopenmp -o CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP

command, and can be invoked with the

     ./CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP Number_of_threads

command, where 'Number_of_threads' is the number of threads the program uses during the execution. 
1. The variables 'z_target', 'z_electron', 'N_electron', 'm_electron' and 'm_target' have the same role as in the previous 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp' code.
2. The 'amplitude[]' variable is a vector standing for the 'y', and 'z' components of the electric field in atomic units and the shape of the envelope of the intensity.
3. The 'Polarisation_Phase' gives the phase between the 'y' and 'z' components of the electric field in degrees. In case it is $90^\circ$ and the two components of the electric field are the same, the incoming field is circularly (right) polarized.
4. The 'Wavelength' and 'PulseWidth' are the wavelength in nanometers and FWHM in femtoseconds respectively.
5. The variable 'iDispersionCounter' corresponds to the number of chirp values, the code will perform calculations. To better understand it, the code calculates the maximum value of chirp (max chirp) to avoid calculating with negative frequencies, according to equation \ref{chirp_eq}. The code will calculate with $2 \times iDispersionCounter$ values. When the 'iDispersionCounter' value is 1, it means, the code will calculate with chirp values (-max chirp, 0, max chirp).
6. The envelope of the laser pulse can be either 'Gaussian', which means a Gaussian envelope, or 'cosSquare' which means the envelope is a cosine square.

The code generates two kinds of output files:
1. The temporal profile of the electric field of the ultrashort laser pulse (i.e.: 'ElectricField_0.000000.txt', where '0.000000' means the chirp value). The first column of the file consists of the time, and the second and third lines are the 'y', and 'z' components of the electric field.
2. The result of the trajectories of the ionised electrons (i.e.: 'Statistics_H_0.000000.txt', where '0.000000' refers to the applied chirp, and the 'H' refers to hydrogen). The first eleven lines contain general information about the calculations.
The general informations are the following:
1. Wavelength in nm, FWHM in fs, amplitudes of the two components of the electric field in Hartree atomic units, and the phase difference between the two components of the electric field 'y' and 'z'.
2. The applied intensity in $\frac{W}{cm^2}$ and applied envelope.
3. The masses of the target and the electron.
4. The binding energy both in atomic units and in electronvolts, and the parameters of the Garvey potential.
5. The maximal value of chirp ('DispersionMax') and applied chirp value ('Dispersion').
6. The number of excitation.
7. The number of ionisation.
8. The anomal events in lines 9 and 10.
9. The rest of the file shows the relevant information about the ionised electrons in 15 columns. The first 13 columns are the same as it was in the output files by the 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp' code. The 14th column is the angular frequency of the electric field, when the electron is ionised. The 15th column is the CEP value at the moment of ionisation in radians.

## Figure 1
The 'Wigner.gnu' is a Gnuplot script generating 'Wigner.eps' which is Figure 1 in the article. It requires three 'waveForm_...' files with three corresponding Wigner functions. These files can be created with the 'Waveform.m' script.

## Figure 2
The 'Energy_Momentum_CEP.m' and 'Energy_Momentum_CEP.gnu' scripts are written to generate Figure 2 in the article. At first, two waveforms should be generated with the 'Waveform.m' file and calculate the electron statistics with the 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp' code. To evaluate the output files, the 'Energy_Momentum_CEP.m' should be used. In this script, the following variables must be given:
1. The 'value' vector variable, refers to the CEP values of the waveforms in the calculations.
2. The applied 'GDD', 'TOD', 'FOD', 'Intensity', and 'Pulsewidth' (FWHM) values.
3. The element variable refers to the kind of atom or ion, the calculations were performed with.
4. The 'epsilon' is corresponding to the adaptive step size in the ODE solver.
5. For processing the files a proper bin width of energy 'bin_Energy' and momentum 'bin_Momentum' should be set. The energy bin width is given by electronvolts, meanwhile the momentum is given by atomic units.

The Energy_Momentum_CEP.gnu is for plotting the results, the energy and momentum distribution, and the two waveforms that were used in the calculations. In the .gnu file, the following variables must be set:
1. two CEP values (CEP1, CEP2)
2. the applied higher-order dispersion (GDD, TOD, and FOD) values,
3. the applied intensity 'Intensity', FWHM 'Pulsewidth', and the kind of atom 'element' should be set.
4. the 'epsilon'.

## Figures 3,4
### Time_Energy.m
The 'Time_Energy.m' script is written to process the output files resulting from the CTMC calculations. To run the script, the values should be set that are typical to the CTMC calculations. These are:
1. The 'value' vector in line 1 describes the values of the higher-order dispersions. In case the calculations were performed with different TOD and FOD values, the 'GDD' variable should be modified to 'TOD' or 'FOD' in lines 23, 58, and 70 respectively.
2. The applied intensity 'Intensity' in line 5 and FWHM 'Pulsewidth' in line 6.
3. The applied CEP values. 'CEP_begin' in line 7 and 'CEP_end' in line 9 stand for the minimal and maximal applied CEP values in degrees respectively. The 'CEP_step' variable stands for the step size between the maximal and minimal CEP values. For example: CEP_begin = 0, CEP_step = 3, and CEP_end = 357 which means the code will deal with CEP values 0, 3, 6, ..., 357.
4. The variable 'element' refers to the atom for which the CTMC calculations were performed.
5. The 'epsilon' variable refers to the error in the adaptive step size Runge-Kutta method.

Upon successful execution, the script has three different kinds of output files.
1. 'Unified_normed_...' files stand for the spectrum related to different higher-order dispersion values (i.e: 'Unified_normed_H_6.5e+14Wcm_7fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-06epsilon.txt'). The first column of the file is the energy in electronvolts. The second line is the normalized counts and the third line is the error of the counts.
2. 'Time_Energy_...' files stand for the photoelectron distributions as a function of ionisation time and energy (i.e: 'Time_Energy_H_6.5e+14Wcm_7fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-06epsilon.txt'). The first column of the file is the time of ionisation. The second column is the energy of the ionised electrons, and the third column stands for the normalized count rate.
3. 'totalsum_' file (i.e: 'totalsum_H_6.5e+14Wcm_7fs.txt') stands for the asymmetry parameter (see Eq. 17 in the article). The first column of the file stands for the different higher-order dispersion values. The second column is the count rate. The third column is the asymmetry parameter, and the fourth is the error belonging to the asymmetry parameter.

### Spectrum_Asymmetry_H_Kr.gnu
The 'Spectrum_Asymmetry_H_Kr.gnu' is a Gnuplot script generating Figure 3 in the article. The script needs the output files 'Unified_normed_...' and 'totalsum_' generated by the 'Time_Energy.m' script. It is necessary to mention the script supposes that the relevant data can be found in four subdirectories in the working directory, namely in 'GDD_H', 'TOD_H', 'FOD_H', and in 'GDD_Kr'. The output of the script is 'Spectrum_Asymmetry_H_Kr.eps'.
### Time_Energy_H_Kr.gnu
The 'Time_Energy_H_Kr.gnu' is a Gnuplot script generating Figure 4 in the article. The script needs output files 'Time_Energy_...' generated by 'Time_Energy.m' script. It also requires corresponding Waveform files generated by 'Waveform.m' and renamed by the CTMC code. The output of the script is 'Time_Energy_H_Kr.eps'.

## Figure 5
The 'Electron_Energy.gnu' is a Gnuplot script generating 'Electron_Energy.eps' which is Figure 5 in the article. On the left side of the figure, the energy of an ionised electron as a function of time is depicted with the applied electric field. Therefore it requires 2 files.
1. The waveform generated by 'Waveform.m', and
2. 'Electron_Energy.txt' which is the output of the 'CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD.cpp' file, although the code requires some modification to produce the necessary output.

To produce the 'Electron_Energy.txt' the following lines in the 'collision_process' function should be uncommented:
   1. //FILE *fp;
   2. //fp=fopen("Electron_Energy.txt","w");
   3. //fprintf(fp,"%Lf\t%Lf\n",t, E_kin+E_pot);
   4. //fclose(fp);
The line in the function 'Statistics'

     if(E_Te<0) { (local_IonisationStatist->excitation)++; (*k)++; }

should be modified to

     if(E_Te<0) { (local_IonisationStatist->excitation)++; /*(*k)++; */ }

After compilation, only one core should be used with the following command:

          ./CTMC_RKPD_SCR_OMP_CPP_GDD 1

The first and second columns of the resulting 'Electron_Energy.txt' are the time and the energy of the ionised electron respectively.
On the right side of the figure, the (Garvey) potentials of the hydrogen and krypton are depicted. The potential of the hydrogen and krypton should be written to files 'H.txt' and 'Kr.txt', where the first column corresponds to the distance, and the second column corresponds to the potential energy.

## Figure 6
Figure 6 can be generated the way Figure 3 and Figure 4, but at higher intensity. The 'Spectrum_HigherIntensity.gnu' script is for plotting the spectrum, asymmetry parameters, and the number of ionisation events. The 'TimeEnergy_HigherIntenstity.gnu' is for plotting the distribution of the photoionised electrons as the function of energy and time of ionisation. The output files of the scripts are 'Spectrum_HigherIntensity.eps' and 'TimeEnergy_HigherIntenstity.eps' respectively.

## Figures 7,8

### Asymmetry.m
The 'Asymmetry.m' script was written to process the output files of the CTMC code to generate asymmetry maps (Figure 7), and electron distributions as a function of ionisation time and energy of electrons. The following details should be given for the script:
1. the higher-order dispersion values the calculations were performed ( 'GDD', 'TOD', 'FOD')
2. the applied intensity ('Intensity')
3. the FWHM in femtoseconds ('PulseWidth')
4. the applied CEP values ('CEP_begin', 'CEP_step', 'CEP_end'). If CEP_begin = 0, CEP_step = 6, and CEP_end = 354, it means the code will evaluate files having CEP values of 0, 6, 12, ...365 degrees.
5. the kind of atom the calculations were performed ('element')
6. the bin width of the energy in electronvolts ('energy_step')
7. and the value corresponds to the step size of the ODE solver ('epsilon').

The 'Asymmetry.m' script has several outputs. They are the following:

1. The plot of the distribution of electrons as a function of time of ionisation and final kinetic energy at a given GDD value. (i.e: 'Time_Energy_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.png')
2. The plot of the distribution of electrons as a function of time of ionisation and final kinetic energy at a given GDD value. In this case, the positive or negative direction of the momentum of the electrons are depicted. (i.e: 'Time_Energy_directionality_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.png')
3. The ascii file of the distribution of electrons at a given GDD value. (i.e: 'Time_Energy_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.txt')
4. The ascii file of the normalized electron spectra. (i.e: 'Unified_normed_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.txt')
5. The plot of the normalized electron spectra. (i.e: 'Spectra_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.jpg')
6. The plot of the electron distribution at a given GDD and CEP value. The positive or negative direction of the momentum of the electrons and the temporal profile of the electric field are depicted. (i.e: 'Time_Energy_Na_0CEP_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.png')
7. The plot of the electron distribution at a given GDD and CEP value. The temporal profile of the intensity is depicted. (i.e: 'Time_Energy_total_Na_0CEP_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.png')
8. The ascii file of the electron distribution at a given GDD and CEP value. The positive or negative direction of the momentum of the electrons is written out. (i.e: 'Time_energy_Na_0CEP_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD.txt')
9. The plot of the asymmetry map (see Eq. 18, and Fig 7 in article). (i.e: 'Asymmetry_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0CEP_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-6epsilon.jpg')
10. The ascii file of the asymmetry map. (i.e: 'Asymmetry_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD.txt')

### Asymmetry_Map.gnu
The 'Asymmetry_Map.gnu' script plots the asymmetry maps, namely the Fig 7 in the article. As input, the script needs the 'Asymmetry_...' files generated by the 'Asymmetry.m' script. The output is 'Asymmetry_Map.eps'.
### Asymmetry_TimeEnergy.gnu
The 'Asymmetry_TimeEnergy.gnu' script plots the electron distributions as a function of time and energy, and the corresponding temporal profile of the electric field or intensity. The script needs two kinds of input files:
1. 'Time_energy_...' files generated by the 'Asymmetry.m' script as input (i.e: 'Time_energy_Na_0CEP_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD.txt' when the distribution of electrons at a given CEP and GDD value is depicted, or 'Time_Energy_Na_4e12Wcm_4.5fs_0GDD_0TOD_0FOD_1e-06epsilon.txt' when the distribution of electrons at a given GDD value is depicted).
2. 'waveForm_...' files generated by 'Waveform.m' script and renamed by the CTMC program.

The following details should be given for the script:
1. The 'TOD' and 'FOD' values, and the 'GDD' values for every subplot.
2. The kind of atom in the 'element' variable.
3. The intensity in the 'Intensity' variable.
4. The FWHM in the 'PulseWidth' variable.
5. The value of 'epsilon'.
6. The value of 'CEP' for every subplot where it is needed.

The script generates the 'Asymmetry_TimeEnergy.eps' file.
